Initial draft of Core ML docs (#2987)
huggingface/diffusers: docs/source/en/optimization/coreml.mdx

<!--Copyright 2023 The HuggingFace Team. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License. You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software distributed under the License is distributed on
an "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied. See the License for the
specific language governing permissions and limitations under the License.
-->

> # How to run Stable Diffusion with CoreML

Author: ```suggestion
# How to run Stable Diffusion with Core ML
```

There are two ways to run Stable Diffusion on Apple hardware:

- Using the `diffusers` Python codebase and leveraging PyTorch's `mps` device. This is suitable for Macs running Apple Silicon chips (M1 or M2), and is explained in [the `mps` guide](mps).

> - Converting Stable Diffusion models to Core ML, the model format supported by Apple frameworks, and using the converted models in native apps. This works on all types of Apple hardware, including iPhone, iPad, M1/M2 Macs and even Intel Macs with enough GPU memory.

Author: Makes total sense, thanks!

Thankfully, Apple engineers developed [a conversion tool](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion) based on `diffusers`. If you have a Mac, you can use the conversion scripts it provides to convert any Stable Diffusion model to Core ML.

Before you convert a model, though, do take a moment to explore the Hugging Face Hub – chances are the model you're interested in is already available in Core ML format. For example, these official models are available in Core ML in the Apple organization:

- Stable Diffusion v1.4: [converted](https://hf.co/apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-4) [original](https://hf.co/CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4)
- Stable Diffusion v1.5: [converted](https://hf.co/apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-5) [original](https://hf.co/runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5)
- Stable Diffusion v2 base: [converted](https://hf.co/apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-2-base) [original](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-base)

> - Stable Diffusion v2.1 base: [converted](https://hf.co/apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-2-1-base) [original](https://huggingface.co/stabilityai/stable-diffusion-2-1-base)

Reviewer: Maybe organize this info in a table so its a bit easier to read. Or it might be even simpler to just include a link to Apple's org and have the user check it out there instead of listing them here.

Reviewer 2: +1

If you are interested in custom Dreamboothed or fine-tuned models, you can take a look at the [`coreml` community organization](https://huggingface.co/coreml) or use [this query to browse](https://huggingface.co/models?pipeline_tag=text-to-image&library=coreml&p=2&sort=likes) through all available models.

> If you can't find the model you're interested in, we recommend you follow the instructions in [Apple's repo](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion) to perform the conversion yourself.

Reviewer: I think it might be nice to also include the command to convert the model to CoreML just to show the user it only requires a single line of code/and it is pretty straightforward. If most users can execute this command and get the converted CoreML model without having to jump to another page, I think that's better for them, and its less disruptive to their workflow :)

```suggestion
If you can't find the model you're interested in, we recommend you follow the instructions in [Apple's repo](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion#-converting-models-to-core-ml) to perform the conversion yourself.
```

> ## Native Diffusers Swift app

Reviewer: I would move this to the end since this doc is about CoreML, and the users just want the code to get started as quickly as possible.

Author: Makes sense. My first draft had this section at the end, but I thought that some non-technical users might land in this page with a vague notion about Core ML and just wanting to run it locally, only to be scared away before they make it to the end. We can probably ignore this for now :)

> Converted Core ML `diffusers` repos usually contain several model variants that are intended for different purposes. The main categories depend on:

Author: The problem here is that `checkpoint` usually refers to a single set of weights, whereas we are talking about 4 different versions stored in the same place. I'll try to rephrase.

The easiest way to run Stable Diffusion on Apple hardware is to use [our open-source Swift repo](https://github.com/huggingface/swift-coreml-diffusers), based on `diffusers` and Apple's conversion and inference repo. You can study the code, compile it with [Xcode](https://developer.apple.com/xcode/) and adapt it for your own needs. For your convenience, there's also a [standalone Mac app in the App Store](https://apps.apple.com/app/diffusers/id1666309574), so you can play with it without having to deal with the code or IDE.

The rest of this guide provides additional details on Core ML conversion and inference using Apple's repo.

## Selecting the Core ML Variant to Use

There are several variants per model:

> - "Original" attention vs "split_einsum". These are two alternative implementations of the critical attention blocks. `split_einsum` was [previously introduced by Apple](https://machinelearning.apple.com/research/neural-engine-transformers), and is particularly optimized for Apple's Neural Engine (ANE) device, which is available in modern iPhones, iPads and M-series computers. `original` attention is only compatible with CPU and GPU, but it can be faster to run your model on CPU+GPU with original attention than it is to use the ANE. See [this performance benchmark](https://huggingface.co/blog/fast-mac-diffusers#performance-benchmarks) as well as some [additional measures provided by the community](https://github.com/huggingface/swift-coreml-diffusers/issues/31).

Reviewer: Maybe you can split this up like:

- Attention block types
   - original attention: compatible with CPU and GPU, etc
   - split_einsum: optimized for ANE
- Language framework
   - packages: for Python inference
   - compiled: required for Swift usage

I think it is a bit more readable this way.

├── README.md
├── original
│   ├── compiled
│   └── packages
└── split_einsum
    ├── compiled
    └── packages
```

You can download and use the variant you need as shown below.

## Core ML Inference in Python

### Prerequisites

```bash
pip install huggingface_hub
pip install git+https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion
```

### Download the Model Checkpoints

To run inference in Python, you have to use one of the versions stored in the `packages` folders, because the compiled ones are only compatible with Swift. You may choose whether you want to use the `original` or `split_einsum` attention styles.

This is how you'd download the `original` attention variant from the Hub:

```Python
from huggingface_hub import snapshot_download
from pathlib import Path

repo_id = "apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-4"
variant = "original/packages"

model_path = Path("./models") / (repo_id.split("/")[-1] + "_" + variant.replace("/", "_"))
snapshot_download(repo_id, allow_patterns=f"{variant}/*", local_dir=model_path, local_dir_use_symlinks=False)
print(f"Model downloaded at {model_path}")
```

The code above will place the downloaded model snapshot inside a directory called `models`.

> ### Inference

Reviewer: Since there are identical section headers, clicking on the Inference in the Swift section defaults to the Python Inference section. You can add these tags to differentiate them:

```suggestion
### Inference[[python-inference]]
```

```

`<output-mlpackages-directory>` should point to the checkpoint you downloaded in the step above, and `--compute-unit` indicates the hardware you want to allow for inference. It must be one of the following options: `ALL`, `CPU_AND_GPU`, `CPU_ONLY`, `CPU_AND_NE`. You may also provide an optional output path, and a seed for reproducibility.

The inference script assumes the original version of the Stable Diffusion model, stored in the Hub as `CompVis/stable-diffusion-v1-4`. If you use another model, you _have_ to specify its Hub id in the inference command-line, using the `--model-version` option. This works both for models already supported, and for custom models you trained or fine-tuned yourself.

For Stable Diffusion 1.5 (Hub id: `runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5`):

```shell
python -m python_coreml_stable_diffusion.pipeline --prompt "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars" --compute-unit ALL -o output --seed 93 -i models/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-5_original_packages --model-version runwayml/stable-diffusion-v1-5
```

## Core ML inference in Swift

> Running inference in Swift is slightly faster than in Python, because the models are already compiled in the `mlmodelc` format. This will be noticeable on app startup when the model is loaded, but shouldn’t be noticeable if you run several generations afterwards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running inference in Swift is slightly faster than in Python because the models are already compiled in the `mlmodelc` format. This is noticeable on app startup when the model is loaded but shouldn’t be noticeable if you run several generations afterward.
```

### Download

> To run inference in Swift on your Mac, you need one of the `compiled` checkpoint versions. We recommend you download them locally using Python code similar to the one we showed above, but using one of the `compiled` variants:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run inference in Swift on your Mac, you need one of the `compiled` checkpoint versions. We recommend you download them locally using Python code similar to the previous example, but with one of the `compiled` variants:
```

### Download

To run inference in Swift on your Mac, you need one of the `compiled` checkpoint versions. We recommend you download them locally using Python code similar to the one we showed above, but using one of the `compiled` variants:

```Python
from huggingface_hub import snapshot_download
from pathlib import Path

repo_id = "apple/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-4"
variant = "original/compiled"

model_path = Path("./models") / (repo_id.split("/")[-1] + "_" + variant.replace("/", "_"))
snapshot_download(repo_id, allow_patterns=f"{variant}/*", local_dir=model_path, local_dir_use_symlinks=False)
print(f"Model downloaded at {model_path}")
```

> ### Inference

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Inference[[swift-inference]]
```

git clone https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion
cd ml-stable-diffusion
```

> And then use Apple's command-line tool using Swift Package Manager's facilities:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And then use Apple's command line tool, [Swift Package Manager](https://www.swift.org/package-manager/#):
```

```bash
swift run StableDiffusionSample --resource-path models/coreml-stable-diffusion-v1-4_original_compiled --compute-units all "a photo of an astronaut riding a horse on mars"
```

You have to specify in `--resource-path` one of the checkpoints downloaded in the previous step, so please make sure it contains compiled Core ML bundles with the extension `.mlmodelc`. The `--compute-units` has to be one of these values: `all`, `cpuOnly`, `cpuAndGPU`, `cpuAndNeuralEngine`.

For more details, please refer to the [instructions in Apple's repo](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion).

> ## Supported `diffusers` Features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Supported Diffusers Features
```

The Core ML models and inference code don't support the vast amount of features, options and flexibility of the Python code base. These are some of the limitations to keep in mind:

- Core ML models are only suitable for inference. They can't be used for training or fine-tuning.
- Only two schedulers have been ported to Swift: the default one used by Stable Diffusion, and `DPMSolverMultistepScheduler`, which we ported to Swift from our `diffusers` implementation. We recomment you use `DPMSolverMultistepScheduler`, as it produces the same quality in about half the steps.

> - Negative prompts, classifier-free guidance scale and image to image tasks are available in the inference code. Advanced features such as depth guidance, ControlNet, latent upscalers, etc., are not available yet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Negative prompts, classifier-free guidance scale, and image-to-image tasks are available in the inference code. Advanced features such as depth guidance, ControlNet, and latent upscalers are not available yet.
```

> Both Apple's [conversion and inference repo](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion) and our own [swift-coreml-diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/swift-coreml-diffusers) are intended as technology demonstrators to enable other developers to build upon them. If you feel strongly about any missing features, please feel free to open a feature request or, better yet, a contribution PR :)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Apple's [conversion and inference repo](https://github.com/apple/ml-stable-diffusion) and our own [swift-coreml-diffusers](https://github.com/huggingface/swift-coreml-diffusers) repos are intended as technology demonstrators to enable other developers to build upon. 

If you feel strongly about any missing features, please feel free to open a feature request or, better yet, a contribution PR :)
```
